Are you struggling to provide
for yourself or your family?
Many today lack the basic necessities,
such as food, clean water, adequate housing.
And this causes some to question
whether God really cares about humans.
But as Jehovah’s people, we are different.
We know that Jehovah
cares for all of his creation.
But we all know
that it is a test of our faith
when things get difficult.
So the question is,
How can we build our faith
so that we are strong and so that it
can help us get through difficult times?
Well, one way is by examining how Jehovah
provides for his animal creation.
Now, why is that helpful?
Well, that examination gives us confidence
that he will care for us as well.
As an example, in the following video,
note how Jehovah provides food
for a massive sea creature.
The largest animal alive on earth today
is also the largest that has ever lived
—the blue whale.
Blue whales can grow to be
over 30 meters (98 feet) long
and weigh up to 180 tons.
Its heart alone may weigh
several hundred kilograms.
How does such a large creature
find enough to eat?
The blue whale migrates great distances
to find tiny crustaceans
known as krill.
When a blue whale
finds a school of krill,
it accelerates toward the krill
and opens its giant mouth.
They may engulf
hundreds of kilograms of krill
with each lunge
amounting to several tons per day.
Blue whales eat a lot.
Yet, Jehovah provides for them,
and he will provide for us.
“There is the sea, so great and wide,
“teeming with countless living things,
both small and great.”
Now, we are amazed at the way Jehovah
provides for all of his animal creation,
including the sea creatures.
The Bible describes this well
if you look at Psalm 104:27, 28
—Psalm 104:27, 28:
“All of them wait for you
to give them their food in its season.
“What you give them, they gather.
When you open your hand,
they are satisfied with good things.”
Yes, meditating on this
aspect of creation builds our faith.
For example, from the video,
do you remember the size of this creature?
Now, can you imagine
if you had the assignment
to feed just one blue whale?
You just make sure
that one whale has enough to eat every day.
Can you imagine that?
Where would we start?
We’d have to hire teams of people
and figure out how to get the food
and how to move the food
to where the blue whale is swimming
(after we figure out where it’s swimming).
Why, it would be a full-time job!
And that would be to feed just one whale,
and there are thousands of them.
And yet, Jehovah has it
all arranged day after day.
We don’t even think about it.
You notice here in verse 27,
it says that “all of them wait
for [Jehovah] to give them their food.”
Now, it doesn’t mean that the whale
just kind of floats on the top of the water
and waits for food to jump in its mouth.
No, it swims; it looks for the food.
When it finds it, it goes after it.
But Jehovah provides it.
In verse 28, it says:
“What [he] give[s] them, they gather.”
Now, you cannot imagine
that blue whale thinking: ‘Come on, really?
‘I’m 180 tons, and you’re
going to feed me with a little crustacean?
Couldn’t we have just worked out
that I eat a couple of big tuna every day?’
No, they gather what Jehovah gives them.
And verse 28 goes on to say
that “they are satisfied
with” Jehovah’s provisions.
So, what’s the point?
Well, did you notice
the comment in the video?
It said: “Jehovah provides for them,
and he will provide for us.”
See, meditating on creation
can build our faith
—strengthen our faith—
in Jehovah’s support.
Note the four lessons that we learn
from how Jehovah cares for his creation.
The first is that if Jehovah has the desire
to care for animals
and provide for their needs,
do you think that Jehovah has the desire
to care for you and your family?
Remember what Jesus
expressed at Matthew 6:26,
where he explained
how Jehovah cares for His creation,
even the small birds, and he said:
“Are you not worth more than they are?”
Yes, if Jehovah feels compelled
to care for his animal creation,
we can be assured that he feels compelled
to care for you and your family.
A second lesson is that we do not need
to be unduly anxious about tomorrow.
Rather, we can confidently ask
Jehovah for our daily needs.
Look at Matthew 6:31, 32
—Matthew 6:31, 32.
It says: “So never be anxious and say,
‘‘‘What are we to eat?’
“or, ‘What are we to drink?’
or, ‘What are we to wear?’
“For all these are the things
the nations are eagerly pursuing.
Your heavenly Father knows
that you need all these things.”
Yes, Jehovah knows we need them.
He knows exactly what we need,
and he promises to provide it.
And if Jehovah has the capacity
to feed a 180-ton blue whale,
do you think he has the capacity
to feed you and me and our families?
Absolutely!
See, we do the best that we can,
and then we trust in Jehovah to do the rest.
And like it mentioned
there in Psalms with the animal creation,
we “wait” on Jehovah
and we “are satisfied with” what he provides.
Our third point is that Jehovah
will not abandon us when we face trials.
Look at Hebrews chapter 13
and the latter part of verse 5
—Hebrews 13:5.
He says: “I will never leave you,
and I will never abandon you.”
Jehovah will never abandon us.
He will care for us
even through our hard times.
Now, how can that help us?
Well, that can help us to make good decisions
—good decisions regarding our employment,
care for our family, worship of Jehovah.
We well remember
Jesus’ words at Matthew 6:33,
where he says:
“[Seek] first the Kingdom . . .
and all these other things
will be [given] to you.”
And finally, our fourth point:
Jehovah promises that he will abundantly care
for all of our needs in the future.
We think of that beautiful promise
at Isaiah 65:22,
where it says: “For the days of my people
will be like the days of a tree.”
Now, the blue whale
is thought to live 80 to 90 years,
and Jehovah keeps providing for it.
He does not have
a limited supply of provisions.
Well, that gives us confidence
that it’s not beyond Jehovah’s ability
to fulfill his promise
and care for us through all eternity.
So, yes, Jehovah’s Word and his creation
give us irrefutable proof
of his constant, loving care
—proof that he cares for us today,
proof that he will care for us
through our difficult days,
and proof that he will care for us
through all eternity.
So may all of us continue to build our faith,
fortify our trust in Jehovah,
become powerful by faith.
We need that faith now,
and we most definitely
will need it to face what is to come.
Now Brother Ron Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will present
the final talk of this symposium,
“Use Creation to Build Your Faith
—Our Bodies.”